Name: DEBO PARNA PANERIEE Stony Brook ID: 116554045"

CSE 564 Visualization — Midterm Exam
Spring 2025

This exam is closed book, closed notes, closed neighbor, and closed smart phone. There is no
need for a calculator. Please do all the problems, at least in part. If you have to derive a
mathematical result, plug in the numbers given into the equations. Good luck!!

1. Visualization and the Challenger Disaster

(a) The 1986 Challenger explosion was preceded by a set of visual materials that failed to convey
the risk of launching in cold weather.

Why did the charts presented before the shuttle’s launch fail to effectively communicate the risk?
What key visualization principles wére violated?
If you were tasked with redesigning those charts, what approach would you take to better convey the relationship between temperature and O-ring damage?

(b) Now imagine you are part of a team responsible for presenting findings to a city council about a potential landslide risk in a mountainous region. The dataset includes: daily rainfall (in
mm), soil moisture levels, historical landslide events, and slope steepness. Your team prepares a slide deck showing 4 charts, each focused on a different variable independently. The slides
contain lots of numbers but few visuals showing correlations or patterns. After the presentation, council members are unconvinced that emergency measures are needed.

Analyze what may have gone wrong in the team’s presentation approach, referencing core visualization principles.

How might you redesign the presentation to better support decision-making? Think beyond the
Challenger disaster example. Present and sketch(thret concrete design ideas that would improve
the communication of risk to a non-expert audience (e.g., city officials or residents). For each,
briefly describe: (i) the visualization technique or approach you would use, (ii) what specific
insight it is meant to convey, (iii) why this is more effective than the original approach. You may
draw from any examples in class (e.g., John Snow, COVID dashboards, visual perception
concepts, etc.), but your ideas should be adapted to this new context. Use the next page.


2. Designing Effective Visual Summaries of Data (UserID Reaction Time (ms))

Assume you are analyzing a dataset that records the reaction times of 
2,000 users in a user interface experiment. The data ranges from 150 
to 850 ms, but has some sharp peaks and troughs due to noise or very frequent outliers. To the right is an example dataset of 20 observations.

(a) Experiment with histograms that trade off fidelity and readability. 
Which histogram communicates the overall distribution more deny: and why? Why might the other histogram be considered too “busy”?

(b) Suggest and justify a technique that reduces busyness ‘without losing meaningful structure. Your proposal may involve a metric that can be optimized or an alternative visualization method.
Be specific in describing how your approach can help reduce noise while preserving or even
enhancing important patterns in the data.

3. Data wrangling

You are a data analyst working with an agricultural research group that’s building an interactive

dashboard to help farmers and policymakers monitor crop yield patterns across the Midwest. The

goal is to understand how environmental and soil conditions influence agricultural

productivity—and to visualize these relationships clearly. You have access to 3 different sources:

e Dataset A: A collection of annual crop yield reports submitted by individual farms

e Dataset B: Daily weather data (precipitation and temperature) collected from satellites and
ground sensors.

e Dataset C: Soil quality measurements, such as pH, organic matter content, and drainage,
collected manually from a subset of farms every few years.

(a) What is your first line of action and what other information do you need?

(b) Let’s assume you’ve cobbled together a dataset like the one shown on the next page. You
notice that one value is missing—a common issue in real-world data. Investigate three different

methods to estimate this missing value:

1. Replace by average
2. Estimate via correlation (visual method is OK)
3. Estimate via k-nearest neighbors (KNN) using Manhattan distance and k=3

The description of the methods is left intentionally vague—recall what we discussed in class.
Compute the estimates for each method and compare the results. Then, reflect on which estimate
you trust the most, and explain why.

Use the next page to write down your answers.

Farm ID Year Crop Yield (t/ha) Avg. Rainfall(mm) Avg. Temp {°C) Soil Quality Score
FOO1 2022 5.5 413 20.1 60

F002 2022 5.6 409 a 63
FOO3 2022 5.8 370 8. 65
FOO4 2022 6.1 382 18.8 68
FOOS 2022 6 425, 19.3 70
FOO6 2022 6.3 (427/ 20.5 72
FOO7 2022 54, 434 19.8 74
FOO8 = 2022 & 439 20.3 77
FOOS 2022 6.9 366 21.9 79
FO10 2022 6.6 426 18.3 missing

4. Bias
You design a dashboard to help city planners understand neighborhood-level health disparities.
The dashboard includes maps, bar charts, and scatterplots, derived from real-world data.

After releasing a pilot version, several planners report being surprised by what they call
"suspicious patterns"—like one‘ neighborhood appearing far worse than others across all
indicators. Upon review, you find that:

The same neighborhood was used as the starting example in training.

Some plots used perspective (3D) rendering.

Some neighborhoods were not available in the dashboard.

A new chart added to highlight affordability shifted attention away from previously balanced
comparisons.

(a) Identify and name at least three different _types of bias that may have influenced user
interpretation in this scenario. For each bias you identified, briefly explain how it works and why it might have misled the planners.
(b) Suggest one design change that could mitigate one of the biases you described.


5. Feature analysis 
You are helping a pollinator conservation group build an interactive visualization based on a

dataset with 18 environmental features collected from dozens of flower fields. The team wants to
identify similar fields, visualize patterns in bee health, and highlight the most important
environmental variables.

(a) The goal is to construct a biplot. Mark the option below that best justifies the use of a biplot:

____ Identify outliers based on missing data values in the original dataset
Estimate the precise numerical correlation between each pair of original variables *
Visualize both the relationships among data points and the influence of variables on
principal components
___ Display how the original features contribute to the overall variance without any projection or
transformation £
___ Determine whether the original dataset followed a normal distribution x

(b) The PCA analysis yields the following loadings for the first two principal components. Each row corresponds to a feature measured across flower fields. 
Use the PCI and PC2 loadings to identify groups of features that form natural clusters. Then, give each cluster a descriptive label that captures what the features have in common. Label the features the table by the cluster ID. 

Justify your clustering based on the direction’ and magnitude of the loadings, and the meaning of
the features themselves. Hint: How do these clusters relate to broader environmental themes that
are important to bees?

6. Perception
You are creating a map-based visualization to help emergency teams monitor wildfire risk zones,
wind patterns, and escape routes. The team is considering several color schemes to highlight and

contrast key features.

(a) Which of the following color combinations should you
___ Yellow on dark blue
____ Blue vs. orange
____ Red vs. green
____ Black on white
____ Purple vs. yellow c

(b) Why? There are two reasons. Explain.

7. Visualization design
You are working with a design team building a map-based dashboard to show air quality across

different neighborhoods. Each district on the map also contains a small circular disk centered
inside it to represent status.

The designers want to use color to represent pollution levels, which are continuous numeric values. They’ve asked for your input.

(a) Is color an appropriate channel for showing quantitative data? Justify your answer by
\O referencing what you’ve learned about visual variables and perception. Think broadly.


(b) The team plans to use a ColorBrewer colormap. What type of ColorBrewer scale would you recommend for this use case: sequential, diverging, or qualitative? Why?

(c) To highlight districts with dangerously high pollution, the team is considering two options for
modifying the disk inside each district:

1. Change the color of the disk to bright red

2. Change the shape of the disk from a circle to a triangle
Which option would you recommend and why?

8. Visualizing Data Distributions

Your team uses box plots to show pollution levels across different districts over time. A
stakeholder expresses concern that the box plots don’t reveal important variation in the data,
such as multiple peaks or unusual data shapes.

(a) Briefly explain why box plots can be misleading or insufficient for understanding the full distribution of a dataset.

Suggest and justify one alternative visualization that would better reveal the shape or
structure of the data. Support your answer with a sketch of the visualization
9. Multivariate visualization

You are a market analyst working for a consumer goods company, tasked with evaluating the
performance of three new product prototypes across multiple criteria. The company has collected
data on various attributes of the prototypes and wants to understand how they compare in these.

Prototype Quality Price Design Durability Innovation
Prototype 1 3 4 2 5 4
Prototype 2 7 di 3 5 3 ‘ 5
Prototype 3 4 2, 3 4 2

(a) Visualize these instances as a radar plot 
(b) Visualize them as a star plot
(c) Visualize the Quality, Price, & Design attributes as a scatterplot matrix